docs/source/gitworkflow_solo.md, before:

# Solo Git Workflow for Your Project

> 📝 This file is part of the `template-project` starter documentation. Once you’ve adapted the template for your own project, you can rename or delete this file.

This guide explains how to work **on your own project** using Git. You’ll learn how to:
- Create branches to safely edit your code.
- Sync your project across devices.
- Avoid merge conflicts and lost work.

This assumes you're working **alone or in a small team** and that this is your own project repository (not a fork).

---

## 1. Keep `main` Clean

The `main` branch should reflect your most stable version — the code you would want someone else to run.

Start each new task or fix by creating a new branch off of `main`. This protects your `main` branch from accidental errors while you work.

### Terminal
```bash
git checkout main       # Switch to the main branch
git pull                # Get the latest updates from GitHub
git checkout -b feature-name  # Create and switch to a new branch
```

### VSCode
- Open the Source Control panel.
- Click the current branch name in the bottom-left.
- Select `main`, then click `+ Create new branch`, and name it.

### GitHub Desktop
- Switch to `main` using the branch menu at the top.
- Click `Fetch origin`.
- Then `Branch > New branch` and enter a name.

Use a branch name that reflects what you're doing: `add-plotting-utils`, `docs-update`, `fix-bug-logging`, or just use a simple increment like `eleanor-patch-1` and `eleanor-patch-2`.

---

## 2. Work on a Branch

Make your changes on the new branch — whether editing code, fixing bugs, or writing documentation. **First, save your files.** Then commit your changes using one of the following methods:

### Terminal
```bash
git add .                                 # Stage all modified files
git commit -m "feat: add new plotting utils"  # Save your staged changes with a message
```

### VSCode
- Remember to **save your files**.
- Go to Source Control, type a message, and click ✔ Commit.

### GitHub Desktop
- First **save your files**.
- Write a commit message in the bottom left.
- Click `Commit to <branch>`.

Don't worry, if you forgot to save some files, you can just save them and do a new commit.

---

## 3. Option A: Merge the Branch (Fast-forward style)

This option merges your feature branch directly into `main` on your local machine, then pushes it to GitHub.

### Terminal
```bash
git checkout main       # Switch to main
git pull                # Make sure it’s up-to-date
git merge feature-name  # Merge your branch
git push                # Push merged changes to GitHub
```

### VSCode
- Switch to `main` via the bottom-left branch menu.
- Open the Source Control panel and select `... > Merge branch...`.
- Choose your feature branch.
- Then run `git push` from the Terminal, or click `Sync Changes` in the Git panel.

### GitHub Desktop
- Switch to `main`.
- `Branch > Merge into current branch` and select your feature branch.
- Then click `Push origin`.

---

## 3. Option B: Open a Pull Request (recommended, even solo!)

Instead of merging directly, you can open a pull request to merge your branch into `main`. This helps preview changes and is useful if you have CI ("continuous integration") tests.  If you're using this template, we have CI test, where the "Action" to run is specified in `.github/workflows/tests.yml` (see [actions_overview.md](actions_overview.md)) and the tests to be run are in the `tests/` folder.  Using a pull request will ensure tests are run (which can find any problems with the edited code) before the merge onto the main branch.

### Terminal to push the branch
```bash
git push -u origin feature-name  # Push the branch to GitHub and set the upstream
```

In a solo project, this usually works automatically. You only need to set the upstream (`-u`) if this is your first push for that branch.

### VSCode
- Save your changes and commit.
- Click `Publish Branch` or `Sync Changes` in the "Source Control" tab.
- If prompted to select a remote, choose `origin` (your GitHub-hosted repo).  Note, if you're collaborating with an external repository, you may instead be choosing `upstream` (see [Git Collaboration](gitcollab_v2.md)).

### GitHub.com
- After pushing, visit your repository on GitHub, e.g. `http://github.com/YOUR_USERNAME/template-project`.
- Click “Compare & pull request” when prompted.
- Add a short message describing your changes.
- Click “Create pull request”.
- Once the pull request has passed all tests, click “Merge”. If it fails some tests, or you notice additional changes you'd like to make, you can make a new commit and sync to github.com which will append these changes into the open pull request (if done from the same branch).

---

## 4. Rinse and Repeat

- Create a new branch for each new feature or fix.
- Merge into `main` (via merge or pull request).
- Push your work regularly.

This helps isolate changes, improve version control, and reduce the chance of conflicts.



---

## (Optional) Sync Across Devices

If you work on multiple computers, you can also push and pull your work to stay in sync.

**On device A:**

### Terminal
```bash
git push origin main
```

### VSCode
- Use `Sync Changes` in Source Control or push via Terminal.

### GitHub Desktop
- Click `Push origin`.

**On device B:**

### Terminal
```bash
git pull origin main
```

### VSCode
- Click `... > Pull` or use Terminal.

### GitHub Desktop
- Click `Fetch origin`, then `Pull`.

To sync a feature branch:

**On device A:**
```bash
git push origin feature-name
```

**On device B:**
```bash
git checkout feature-name       # Switch to the feature branch
git pull origin feature-name    # Pull latest updates from GitHub
```

Or use VSCode or GitHub Desktop's branch menu to check out the branch and pull changes.

---

## Tips

- Use `git status` to see what files you've changed.
- Use `git log --oneline` to view recent commits quickly.
- If you need to undo something, don’t panic — ask Git for help or see [GitHub Docs](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/using-git).

---

## Cheatsheet: Handy Git Commands

```bash
git status            # Show the current state of your working directory

git branch            # List all local branches
git branch -d name    # Delete a branch (only if already merged)
git branch -D name    # Force delete a branch (even if not merged)

git log --oneline     # Compact history of recent commits

git diff              # Show what's changed but not staged
git diff --staged     # Show what's staged for commit

git restore filename  # Discard changes to a file (careful!)
```

Commit message:

[DOCS] Added visuals to explain the workflow (#19)
* [DOCS] Reformat gitorg_transfer.md
* [DOCS] Update + reformat faq
* [DOCS] Added visuals + ifmeo logo

docs/source/gitworkflow_solo.md, after:

# Solo Git Workflow for Your Project

> 📝 This file is part of the `template-project` starter documentation. Once you’ve adapted the template for your own project, you can rename or delete this file.

This guide explains how to work **on your own project** using Git. You’ll learn how to:
- Create branches to safely edit your code.
- Sync your project across devices.
- Avoid merge conflicts and lost work.

This assumes you're working **alone or in a small team** and that this is your own project repository (not a fork).

![GitHub branch-and-PR workflow](_static/github_solo_workflow.png)

*A typical GitHub branch and pull request workflow (for solo working).  You work in a branch of **your main**; the important copy of the code (and its history) is in the main branch.  The local main are just a means of transferring information (or running the latest clean version of the code).*


---

## 1. Keep `main` Clean

The `main` branch should reflect your most stable version — the code you would want someone else to run.

Start each new task or fix by creating a new branch off of `main`. This protects your `main` branch from accidental errors while you work.

### Terminal
```bash
git checkout main       # Switch to the main branch
git pull                # Get the latest updates from GitHub
git checkout -b feature-name  # Create and switch to a new branch
```

### VSCode
- Open the Source Control panel.
- Click the current branch name in the bottom-left.
- Select `main`, then click `+ Create new branch`, and name it.

### GitHub Desktop
- Switch to `main` using the branch menu at the top.
- Click `Fetch origin`.
- Then `Branch > New branch` and enter a name.

Use a branch name that reflects what you're doing: `add-plotting-utils`, `docs-update`, `fix-bug-logging`, or just use a simple increment like `eleanor-patch-1` and `eleanor-patch-2`.

---

## 2. Work on a Branch

Make your changes on the new branch — whether editing code, fixing bugs, or writing documentation. **First, save your files.** Then commit your changes using one of the following methods:

### Terminal
```bash
git add .                                 # Stage all modified files
git commit -m "feat: add new plotting utils"  # Save your staged changes with a message
```

### VSCode
- Remember to **save your files**.
- Go to Source Control, type a message, and click ✔ Commit.

### GitHub Desktop
- First **save your files**.
- Write a commit message in the bottom left.
- Click `Commit to <branch>`.

Don't worry, if you forgot to save some files, you can just save them and do a new commit.

---

## 3. Option A: Merge the Branch (Fast-forward style)

This option merges your feature branch directly into `main` on your local machine, then pushes it to GitHub.

### Terminal
```bash
git checkout main       # Switch to main
git pull                # Make sure it’s up-to-date
git merge feature-name  # Merge your branch
git push                # Push merged changes to GitHub
```

### VSCode
- Switch to `main` via the bottom-left branch menu.
- Open the Source Control panel and select `... > Merge branch...`.
- Choose your feature branch.
- Then run `git push` from the Terminal, or click `Sync Changes` in the Git panel.

### GitHub Desktop
- Switch to `main`.
- `Branch > Merge into current branch` and select your feature branch.
- Then click `Push origin`.

---

## 3. Option B: Open a Pull Request (recommended, even solo!)

Instead of merging directly, you can open a pull request to merge your branch into `main`. This helps preview changes and is useful if you have CI ("continuous integration") tests.  If you're using this template, we have CI test, where the "Action" to run is specified in `.github/workflows/tests.yml` (see [actions_overview.md](actions_overview.md)) and the tests to be run are in the `tests/` folder.  Using a pull request will ensure tests are run (which can find any problems with the edited code) before the merge onto the main branch.

### Terminal to push the branch
```bash
git push -u origin feature-name  # Push the branch to GitHub and set the upstream
```

In a solo project, this usually works automatically. You only need to set the upstream (`-u`) if this is your first push for that branch.

### VSCode
- Save your changes and commit.
- Click `Publish Branch` or `Sync Changes` in the "Source Control" tab.
- If prompted to select a remote, choose `origin` (your GitHub-hosted repo).  Note, if you're collaborating with an external repository, you may instead be choosing `upstream` (see [Git Collaboration](gitcollab_v2.md)).

### GitHub.com
- After pushing, visit your repository on GitHub, e.g. `http://github.com/YOUR_USERNAME/template-project`.
- Click “Compare & pull request” when prompted.
- Add a short message describing your changes.
- Click “Create pull request”.
- Once the pull request has passed all tests, click “Merge”. If it fails some tests, or you notice additional changes you'd like to make, you can make a new commit and sync to github.com which will append these changes into the open pull request (if done from the same branch).

---

## 4. Rinse and Repeat

- Create a new branch for each new feature or fix.
- Merge into `main` (via merge or pull request).
- Push your work regularly.

This helps isolate changes, improve version control, and reduce the chance of conflicts.



---

## (Optional) Sync Across Devices

If you work on multiple computers, you can also push and pull your work to stay in sync.

**On device A:**

### Terminal
```bash
git push origin main
```

### VSCode
- Use `Sync Changes` in Source Control or push via Terminal.

### GitHub Desktop
- Click `Push origin`.

**On device B:**

### Terminal
```bash
git pull origin main
```

### VSCode
- Click `... > Pull` or use Terminal.

### GitHub Desktop
- Click `Fetch origin`, then `Pull`.

To sync a feature branch:

**On device A:**
```bash
git push origin feature-name
```

**On device B:**
```bash
git checkout feature-name       # Switch to the feature branch
git pull origin feature-name    # Pull latest updates from GitHub
```

Or use VSCode or GitHub Desktop's branch menu to check out the branch and pull changes.

---

## Tips

- Use `git status` to see what files you've changed.
- Use `git log --oneline` to view recent commits quickly.
- If you need to undo something, don’t panic — ask Git for help or see [GitHub Docs](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/using-git).

---

## Cheatsheet: Handy Git Commands

```bash
git status            # Show the current state of your working directory

git branch            # List all local branches
git branch -d name    # Delete a branch (only if already merged)
git branch -D name    # Force delete a branch (even if not merged)

git log --oneline     # Compact history of recent commits

git diff              # Show what's changed but not staged
git diff --staged     # Show what's staged for commit

git restore filename  # Discard changes to a file (careful!)
```
